# master-project
Abstract of the proposal (master's project)

Wind gusts have a significant impact on various sectors, including infrastructure, transportation networks, and human safety. Accurate wind gust predictions enable better risk assessment, preparedness, and mitigation strategies to minimize the potential damages and disruptions caused by these extreme wind events. To leverage recent progress in artificial intelligence, this Masters thesis focuses on the accurate prediction of wind gusts using machine learning algorithms, specifically Random Forest (RF), LightGBM, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), and Convolutional LSTM. The proposal begins with a comprehensive literature review that examines the existing research on wind gusts, machine learning techniques, and the validity of using machine learning for wind gust prediction. Our review highlights the importance of employing explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) methods, such as feature permutation and SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations), to interpret and understand the models’ predictions. Our pilot study demonstrates that it is possible to use ML algorithms to identify key predictors of summer thunderstorm wind gusts, such as Convective Available Potential Energy (CAPE), GUSTEX, and wind shear. These findings motivate the main research task in this thesis project: developing robust ML predictions for European windstorms. XAI methods will provide insight into the physical pathways to wind gust production and potentially identify new predictors for extreme wind gusts. The proposal incorporates a timeline and assesses potential risks to ensure reliable research outcomes.
